# SI & Optics

## Si

### You know what dimensions are

Dimensions specify of what sort some quantity is like space, time, energy, force.

### You know what SI-units are

SI (International System) are standards that tell us about the quantities of a measurement and are defined using references.

### You know what prefixes are

Prefixes are used to express the magnitude of a number in a readable way.

| Prefix        | Magnitude  |
| ------------- | ---------- |
| tera (T)      | $10^{12}$  |
| giga (G)      | $10^9$     |
| mega (M)      | $10^6$     |
| kilo (k)      | $10^3$     |
| centi (c )    | $10^{-2}$  |
| milli (m)     | $10^{-3}$  |
| micro ($\mu$) | $10^{-6}$  |
| nano (n)      | $10^{-9}$  |
| pico (p)      | $10^{-12}$ |

### You understand scientific notation

This is explained in the [first math paper]([Introduction Algebra](https://schoolpapers.org/papers/6/0.html) 

### You understand what significant figures are

All digits are significant figures except

- Zeros `preceding` a fraction like the first two digits in $0045.23$

- Zeros `at the end` of a number that has no decimal point like the last digit in $456540$

Significant figures are useful in measurement because they describe with what certainty we know a result from a measurement. The last significant digit is therefore called the **uncertain** digit. When we combine numbers, the result can not be more precise than the least precise of the original numbers.

### You know how to add and subtract physical quantities

When adding numbers, the result has the precision (number of points after the decimal points) of the least precise number used in the calculation.

### You know how to multiply and divide physical quantities

The result can only have as many significant figures as the number with the least number of significant figures.

## Optics

### You can draw shadows and difference between core and secondary shadows

A shadow can be created by **point sources** or an **extended source**.

- From a `point source` one draws rays to the vertices of an object on which there can end or begin a shadow.

- From a `extended source` one draws rays from each vertex of the extended source  to the vertices of an object where a shadow can begin or end.

Then one needs to inspect every area enclosed by the previously drawn rays and determine if light can reach that area or not. If no light reaches a spot then there exists a **core shadow**, if there is light but not the full amount reaching such an area then it is a **secondary shadow**. Secondary shadows can be created by using multiple point sources or at least one extended source.

### You can apply the law of reflection, draw ray diagrams for  reflections

The law of reflection states that the angle of incidence to the normal is the same for the incoming and outgoing ray. So, any ray that hits some plane at some point forms an angle to an imaginary line that is perpendicular to the plane. The ray is then reflected at the same angle to the normal on the opposite side.

Ray diagrams can be drawn by drawing lines for individual rays and tracing where there intersect with other surfaces

Human eyes treat rays as straight lines, so reflected rays appear to the human eye to be in a different spot than the real rays, forming a virtual image.

### You can understand, draw and calculate refraction through any media

Refraction happens due to the fact that light travels on average slower trough different mediums and bends towards or outward of the normal.

Snell's law describes this process, where $\alpha_i$ and $\alpha_r$ are the angles of the incident and refracted ray measured towards the normal. The variables $n_1$ and $n_2$ are the refractive indices of the first and second medium. Refractive indices are inversely proportional to the average speed of light through that medium, where the speed is equal to $\frac{c}{n}$. Then the law states

$$
\frac{\sin \alpha_i}{\sin \alpha_r} = \frac{n_2}{n_1} = \frac{c_1}{c_2}
$$

### You can explain the circumstances necessary for total internal reflection, and you can calculate the critical angle

Total internal reflection takes place when light is not refracted at the meeting point of two mediums, but stays in the same medium and is reflected. This takes place when the second medium has a lower refractive index and therefore light is bent outwards to the normal. At the critical angle, the refracted rays are perpendicular to the normal. When rays hit the plane from an angle bigger than the critical angle, then total internal reflection takes place.

The critical angle can be derived from Snell's law, where $a_r = 90°$.

$$
\sin \alpha_i = \frac{n_2}{n_1}
$$

This equation implies that the critical angle is at 

$$
\sin ^ {-1} \left( \frac{n_2}{n_1} \right)
$$

Where $n_1 > n_2$

### You can draw ray diagrams of light through convex and concave lenses

- The ray of the diagram of a `convex` lens is represented by parallel light rays that are perpendicular to the middle of the lens. After the rays pass the lens, they **converge** and intersect all in a point called the focus point.

- The ray diagram of a `concave` lens is represented by parallel light rays that are perpendicular to the middle of the lens. After they pass the lens they **diverge** and if you would trace the race back they all cross in an imaginary focus point.

### You can calculate various distances and magnification of objects through lenses

An Object with height $o$ and distance $d_1$ from a lens with focus length $f$ produces an image of height $i$ and distance $d_2$ from the lens. The following rule applies to these quantities

$$
\frac{1}{f}=\frac{1}{d_1}+\frac{1}{d_2}
$$

The magnification $M$ of a lens is equal to $\frac{d_2}{d_1}$ which is equal to $\frac{i}{o}$

A convex lens can in addition to producing a real image as well produce no image or a virtual one. 

- `No` image is produced when $f=d_1$ because then $\frac{1}{d_2}$ would need to equal $0$ which is impossible.

- A `virual` image is produced on the same side as the real object with $d_2$ being negative and happens when $d_1 > f$.
