# Kinematics

## Vectors

### You know what a vector is

A vector is an arrow in space (in elementary physics often 2d or 3d) that has a length and a direction and starts at the origin. Mathematically, it can be expressed as a list of numbers that contain the coordinates for the tip of this arrow.

### You can add and subtract vectors

To add or subtract vectors, one takes every pair of coordinates and adds or subtracts them and writes them down as the solution for the respective coordinate. The following example of and 3d vector helps clarify this explanation

$$
\begin{pmatrix} 3 \\ 5 \\ 6 \end{pmatrix} - 
\begin{pmatrix} 1 \\ 4 \\ 11 \end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 3 - 1 \\ 5 - 4 \\ 6 - 11 \end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 2 \\ 1 \\ -5 \end{pmatrix}
$$

### You can multiply vectors by a scalar

One can multiply a vector by a scalar (number) by multiplying every component of the vector but this scalar. The following example tries to clarify this

$$
4 \cdot \begin{pmatrix} 3 \\ 5 \\ 6 \end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 4 \cdot 3 \\ 4 \cdot 5 \\ 4 \cdot 6 \end{pmatrix} = 
\begin{pmatrix} 12 \\ 20 \\ 24 \end{pmatrix} 
$$

## Kinematics

### You can describe motion with tables, diagrams and equations

Motions are mostly described as a function of time, keeping track of variables like velocity ($v$), acceleration ($a$) and displacement ($s$). Which are often visualized in at-, vt- and st-graphs where the time is on the x-axis. The y-intercept on the st-graph is called $s_0$ and the y-intercept on the vt-graph is called $v_0$. This text will only consider uniform motion and uniformly accelerated motion, which causes that the y-intercept for the at-graph is just $a$.

The main equations quantifying these variables are

$$
v=v_0 + at \text{ (1)}
$$

$$
s = v_0t + \frac12at² \text{ (2)}
$$

$$
v^2 = v_0^2 + 2as \text{ (3)}
$$

Note that for uniform motion $a=0$ the equations simplify and the subindex $0$ is dropped for convenience, i.e. One just writes $v$ instead of $v_0$ because the equation $1$ simplifies to $v=v_0$ when $a=0$.

$$
s=vt
$$

### You understand the difference between speed and velocity

 The `velocity` of an object is a vector that shows its movement including the direction, where its length is defined to be the `speed` or the quotient of the distance traveled in a time interval. 

### You can differentiate between the terms "average velocity" and "instantaneous velocity" and can calculate both

- The term `average velocity` is defined as the constant velocity that is needed to travel a distance in a specific time interval.
  
  An object has moved from point $A$ to $B$ with a distance of $5m$ in $10s$ but it could have moved with different velocities, maybe it did not move on straight. But if we move with $\frac{5m}{10s}=\frac12 \frac{m}{s}$ from point $A$ to $B$ we will reach the point $B$ at the same time as the object.

- The term `instantaneous velocity` refers to the velocity of an object in a very (infinity) small period of time. And is the tangent to the curve representing the displacement over time. So instead of taking a period of time like in the average velocity, we just consider one point.

### You can convert the velocity from m/s to km/h and vice versa

It is best to consider an example for the conversion from $\frac{m}{s}$ to $\frac{km}{h}$ taking for example $60 \frac{m}{s}$. Then using the fact that $1000m=1km$ and $1h=3600s$ we get

$$
60 \frac{m}{s} = 
60 \frac{km}{s} / 1000 = 
0.06 \frac{km}{s} = 
0.06 \frac{km}{s} \cdot 3600 = 
216 \frac{km}{h}
$$

With this we get the multiplication factor of $\frac{3600}{1000} = 3.6$ for the conversion in the other direction we get $\frac{1000}{3600} = \frac{1}{3.6}$, therefore we need to divide by 3.6.

### You can explain "acceleration" (both positive and negative) and calculate it

Acceleration is defined as the change in velocity over time. Positive acceleration means that an object is moving faster with time away from the origin in the positive direction, or respectively in the negative direction for negative acceleration.

The average acceleration (which here is the same as the instantaneous acceleration because we only consider constant acceleration) can be calculated as follows

$$
a = \frac{\Delta v}{\Delta t}
$$

where $\Delta t$ is a time period and $\Delta v$ the change of the velocity in this time period.

### You can calculate the reaction and braking distance

This problem can be split into two simpler ones

- For the `reaction` distance the object is not decelerating, and it is moving uniformly and one should use equation 2 with $a=0$.

- For the `braking` the object one can assume that the car decelerates with constant (negative) acceleration and one should use equation 2 with the appropriate negative acceleration and initial velocity.

### You understand free fall and can calculate free falls tasks

As it is known from Newtons law, the free fall is a uniformly accelerated motion with an acceleration of $9.81 \frac{m}{2^2}$ often denoted with $g$.
